Special Report number 238. 14 minutes 30 seconds coming in 3, 2, 1.
NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, presents a special
report on the Gamma-ray Observatory.
For many years, astronomers learned about the universe by looking at it in the
narrow part of the electromagnetic spectrum called visible light. Later, they
discovered that stars send out kinds of energy that we cannot see, such as
infrared and ultraviolet radiation, radio waves, x-rays, and gamma rays. Each
part of the spectrum has its own contributions to make to our understanding of
the universe. The Gamma Ray Observatory, scheduled to be launched by the Space
Shuttle in 1988, will be a powerful tool for understanding some of the most
fascinating objects in space, Pulsars, quasars, active galaxies, and black
holes. Whenever one of these violent events takes place in the universe, a
supernova explosion or a black hole or a pulsar, lots of very, very energetic
processes take place. Dr. Donald Niffen is project scientist for the Gamma Ray
Observatory at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. Because gamma rays are such
high energy, that means in these processes, in these interactions which occur,
then a lot of energy is available to go into things like gamma rays. Now the way
that we learn about any object viewing it through astronomy is of course we
don't have direct access where we can make so-called in situ measurements. You
have to deduce what's going on in the vicinity of the place where the gamma rays
are being produced by the things that you can see. Gamma rays, like any other
photon, travel directly from the source to us so we know or can make a good
guess as to what object they're coming from. But what we want to learn about by
observing the gamma rays is what mechanism is occurring. This then tells us
about the physics that's going on in the source and hence what sort of types of
violet reactions are taking place. From this then we can learn about things like
the evolution of our universe. We can learn about the actual details of the
supernova process where very heavy elements are believed to be formed. The
observatory has four detectors on it that are designed to look for different
aspects of gamma-ray astronomy, one that looks at gamma-ray bursts, and one that
looks primarily for high-energy gamma rays. For the details, back to Dr. Niffen.
What we mean by gamma ray bursts here is that there have been phenomena observed
for the last 10 years or so which are observed to be very short, intense bursts
of gamma rays. These are fairly low-energy gamma rays, so this instrument is
optimized to look at low energies. The idea here is to try to find out what the
origin of these bursts is. PHILIP GREENEY FISHERMANISTERS, IT'S STILL A PUZZLE
IN SPITE OF THE FACT THAT WE HAVE BEEN ABLE TO OBSERVE THEM NOW FOR SEVERAL
YEARS. WHAT WE NEED TO DO IS FIND OUT WHERE THESE SOURCES ARE. WE DON'T HAVE A
GOOD IDEA OF WHERE THEY ARE. WE'VE GOT TO PINPOINT THEIR LOCATIONS BETTER SO
THAT WE CAN LOOK AT THEM WITH OTHER TYPES OF TELESCOPE, GROUND-BASED
OBSERVATORIES, THE SPACE TELESCOPE, AND FIND OUT THINGS ABOUT THE OTHER REGIONS
OF THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM AND PUT ALL OF THESE PIECES OF THE puzzle
together to understand where these sources are and what is causing these short,
intense bursts. One number that we like to quote to show the significance of
these bursts is that one was observed to come from what we believe to be outside
our galaxy. And if we've actually pinpointed that source properly, then as much
energy was received from that one source in these gamma rays in one tenth of a
second as that emitted by our sun in a thousand years in all forms of energy
that's emitted. So we're talking really about very, very intense sources. That's
one instrument that's on the Gamma-ray Observatory. A second instrument is
designed to make very detailed measurements of the energy of each individual
gamma ray that is detected. We can look for abundances of these gamma rays at
given energies, these so-called gamma-ray lines, which are then signatures of
the process that's occurring to produce them. This instrument would look for
things like supernovae, lines produced in supernovae, and other such phenomena.
The phenomena such as the annihilation of matter and antimatter, which also
gives unique signatures. Most of our universe is made of matter. On the other
hand, we know that for every particle of matter, theoretically there is a
particle of antimatter. When a particle of matter comes into contact with a
particle of antimatter, they tend to annihilate or destroy each other. Again,
Dr. Niffin explains. Using the standard Einstein formula of energy is equal to
mc-squared, the matter is converted into energy. A lot of this energy often ends
up in the form of gamma rays. Usually when this happens, the gamma rays are
produced at a very precise energy. and you can observe these gamma rays of these
energies, then you know that that sort of annihilation takes place. Well, we do
know that some antimatter does exist in our galaxy. We know, for instance, that
we do have electrons, but we also have positrons, the antiparticle of the
electron. They're produced in certain types of processes that we know about.
They're produced even in stars that are made up of matter rather than antimatter
directly. When you get a lot of these anti-electrons, antimatter electrons, the
positrons, and they exist in the same region with a lot of electrons, then they
can combine, they annihilate, and a lot of energy is released. And this is
released at a very specific gamma-ray energy. This has been observed from the
direction of the center of our galaxy. But a lot more needs to be studied to
understand what sort of conditions must exist in the source region for these to
occur and are they being emitted from the rest of our galaxy at some lower level
that we just haven't yet been able to detect. The more sensitive detectors of
the Gamma-ray Observatory will be able to see them and to map out their
intensity throughout our galaxy. In fact, it might even be possible to see them
coming from some very active galaxies outside of our own. A third instrument on
the Gamma Ray observatory is a Compton Telescope. It's so named, a Compton
Telescope, because the basic mechanism for detecting them depends upon a
physical interaction called the Compton scatter. The photon comes into the
detector and it scatters in the material into the detector and through this
process, actually through two such interactions, the gamma ray presence is
detected and you can learn things about its energy and the direction from which
it came by studying the details of the interaction within the detector. This one
covers the intermediate ranges. It can do some measurements of gamma-ray lines,
which are more appropriate to the lower energy level. It can do some
measurements of higher energy gamma rays, which start to get one into the higher
energy realm of gamma rays, which is a whole different set of processes
involving the nuclear interactions of very, very energetic particles such as
cosmic rays. And then the highest energy instrument is a spark chamber
instrument which detects gamma rays by a process called pair production. And
here it's just the inverse of the process I was describing to you before. Here,
now we take the energy which is contained in the gamma ray and convert it into
matter. an electron and its antiparticle, a positron. We cannot easily detect
the gamma-ray directly, but we can detect this electron and positron. And its
interaction process has a very unique signature. We take a digitized snapshot of
this process in the spark chamber. We can tell from this that a gamma-ray indeed
entered into our instrument and by studying the details of the interaction we
can again determine from where the gamma ray came and how much energy it had.
Here we're studying the very highest energy processes. This instrument also has
the best angular resolution, so we can really pinpoint the sources from which
these gamma rays came and use the full capability of astronomy to go look at
these sources at all wavelengths. And only now, for the first time then, will we
be able to study these sources at the broadest range of wavelengths possible and
fully understand everything that's going on within the sources. I don't mean to
imply that we're going to answer all the questions of astrophysics, but we think
we're going to make giant steps forward when we can open up the complete
electromagnetic spectrum to observation. Dr. David Thompson, also from Goddard
Space Flight Center, gave us an example of some of the kinds of contributions
the Gamma Ray Observatory can make. The Gamma Ray Observatory will help
scientists understand pulsars. These objects in space were first discovered by
radio astronomers. It is now thought that a pulsar is a rapidly rotating neutron
star, a remnant of a star that once lived. Dr. David Thompson said that when a
star dies in a supernova explosion, it leaves behind a tiny core of extremely
dense material. The example we always like to use is if you had a sugar cube
made out of neutron star material, it would weigh about 300 million tons on the
surface of the Earth, a sugar cube. So this is what a neutron star is like.
These neutron stars are spinning, and as they spin, they put out pulses of radio
emission, and some of these are now known to really put out pulses of gamma ray
emission. Those that we've studied indicate that, even though there are lots
more radio waves seen from these, most of the energy that we see coming out of a
pulsar is actually in the form of gamma rays. And that means that by studying
the gamma rays we learn something about what it's like around a neutron star, A
place that's so exotic and foreign that we can't even picture it on Earth. The
forces that make the universe change are those that are reflected in the high
-energy processes like pulsars and quasars. And by learning about the gamma rays
that come from these, we learn about the mechanisms that make these exotic
objects work. Quasars have always been considered exotic because they appear to
be moving away from us at a large fraction of the speed of light, which may
indicate that they're somewhere in the very distant parts of the universe. And
yet the fact that we can see them indicates that they are radiating tremendous
amounts of energy and may indeed be powered by black holes. Well, if you want to
understand what's going on somewhere down near a black hole... You can't see
into a black hole, of course. That's one of the main principles of that. It
swallows up everything that comes to its surface. But if you want to see what's
going on near a black hole you have to get out something that involves a large
amount of energy and that's a gamma ray. There are a number of processes by
which the matter falling into a black hole or spiraling around a black hole can
radiate gamma rays. And we think that in the case of the quasars that we're
seeing we may indeed be seeing down into the central what some scientists called
the infernal machine that's down in the middle of a quasar. The Gamma-ray
Observatory will also be able to detect gamma rays from solar flares and help us
to learn what it is about our sun that can produce such violent outbursts of
energy. There are a number of ways in which gamma rays can help us learn about
the early universe. Again, Dr. David Thompson. There are gamma rays coming from
all parts of the sky, and studies of this indicate that they're probably coming
almost uniformly, and that there is a background that comes almost uniformly
from all parts of the sky. means it's probably coming from outside our own
galaxy, and may indeed be coming from far back in not only space but in time,
near the beginning of the Universe. Dr. Niffen mentioned the question of the
existence of matter and antimatter in the Universe in equal proportions. Some
theoreticians would believe that there are indeed antigalaxies, or anticlusters
of galaxies, in which everything is made of antimatter, And, theories have been
developed based on this concept, in which the edges at the universe between
clusters of galaxies, which are matter, and clusters of galaxies, which are
antimatter, at the edges you have this process of annihilation in which matter
and antimatter meet and annihilate. You probably remember this is what powered
the Starship Enterprise in the old Star Trek series. And, it indeed is a source
of energy. It comes out in the form of gamma rays. and we can look, therefore,
back in time at these gamma rays that we're seeing. The Gamma Ray Observatory
will help scientists answer questions on the largest possible scale. What makes
the universe go? What makes solar flares on the sun? What drives quasars and
pulsars? Because gamma rays are so powerful, astronomers firmly believe the
observatory may detect things deep in the universe which we never knew existed.
NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, has presented a special
report on the GammaRay Observatory.